## Overview
Analytics has become prevalent today to any industry that deals with numbers. Due to its ability to look at large sets of data in novel ways and providing newer insights, it has also come to be adopted by sports industry. SMU athletics team approached MSBA analytics team, Deviants to help them in analyzing the data specific to football games to help them understand their customer base. This exercise hopes to bring in newer insights into building new strategies for improved customer orientation.
Beginning late Jan 2018, Team Deviant began having weekly meetings with SMU Athletics department to understand the scope of the project. The team kept in constant touch with the client through email, messaging and phone calls to expedite the data gathering. These interactions were used in preparing the blueprint and finding the data sources, defining the goals of the project, and charting out the workflow for execution of the goals. 

## Vision
The chief objectives that were defined were: 1) To analyze and provide suggestions for increasing customer attendance at the football games, 2) Provide demographic insights of fanbase, 3) Identify areas beyond the Highland park to increase fanbase,4) Provide insights into factors that affect game attendance and ticket purchasing behavior, 5) Prepare a survey to be carried out during the football season to gain deeper understanding of the fanbase

## Approach
Analysis was carried out in 4 broad categories: 
1) Explored the data, 
2) Analysis of data at individual level, 
3) Analysis of data at game level, 
4) Analysis of seasonal ticket buyers, 
5) Customer profiles using census data, 6) Analysis of social media data 

## Conclusions and suggestions
### 1.	Explore the data 
The goal of is this analysis is to give a general descriptive analysis for team SMU Mustang at game-level and for customer behavior, such as purchasing tickets and attending events, at individual level. The focus here is on attendance rate—what’s the performance of attendance rate in recent 5 years and how to improve it.
By analyzing game data which includes event name, event time, opponent, ticket sales, results and attendance rate for each game, it’s shown that the first game held in each year from 2013 to 2015 always has the highest ticket sales and the highest attendance rate. It’s important to make follow-ups for the following games. 
Based on the exploratory view of the data it is observed that SMU Mustang went through a hard time in 2014 and 2015 as can be observed from attendance rate of games in 2016 and 2017 which are lower compared to preceding years. It is seen that game results can have a lag effect on attendance rate. The fundamental solution is to select good players and employ good coach to improve team strength. Besides, it’s important to let students and prior customers know that SMU is becoming stronger and won a lot in 2017. It is a great team that can bring audience exciting games.
By analyzing ticket data which includes purchase history and attendance rate for each customer, it was found that customers who spend less on one ticket or receive free tickets are inclined to choose not to attend games. Reducing waste of free tickets can help increase attendance rate. If possible, establishing online channels for students or other customers to transfer free tickets would be a smart move.
Customer segmentation is important .There are customers who buy tickets often but seldom attend games and customers who seldom buy tickets but attend every game. The marketing department can use different promotion methods to reach out to these two segments of customers with different frequency of purchase. For example, for the first customer segment, it is suggested to improve their experience and listen to their feedback in order to let them make good use of tickets.  For the other customer segment, incentives are suggested to encourage them to buy tickets more often with the help of discount or other promotional methods. 

### 2.	Single ticket buyer analysis at individual level
One of the main objectives for this project is to see the attendance rate perform in the DFW map, the free ticket strategy performance in the DFW map by year. Using the transaction data, the following metrics were calculated -  recency, frequency, monetary value, attendance rate. The data was further filtered to retain those with monetary value = 0, i.e., the free ticket records.
Following the selection of the free ticket data clustering was done. Based on cluster analysis, it was observed that customers can be considered into 3 groups based on their average recency, when was the last time they bought a ticket, form three clusters is 13, 8 and 26. The higher recency means that customer come  more recently game. If the recency is low, it implies that the customer does not attend recent games. For example, cluster_0 group’s average ticket price would be $58. Also, based on frequency, it was found that most of customer would attend two games. For the people who came recently, they would buy more than two games, but the attendance rate is quiet low compare to the other group. As for the region, it was observed that people from North Dallas mainly came in the past year 2013-2015, but they did not come recently.  Also, those group can accept higher ticket price than other area. 
As for the free ticket strategy, it was not a success in 2013, bringing few people from North of Dallas to the game. But in the year 2016, free ticket did not attract people and people did not come. It was also observed that people from near campus who got free ticket did not come to the game quit often during the year 2013 to 2017.
All in all, it would be a wise way to target the North Dallas regions because customers from this region can afford higher ticket price and the attendance rate too is high for this group. Secondly, free ticket strategy needs revisiting as it was observed not to work well with respect to increasing attendance at games.  

### 3.	Single ticket buyer analysis at game level 
Previously the data was analyzed to peruse the factors that affect an individual attending the games. For further analysis the data was analyzed at the game level. The goal of the analyses was to identify the factors that affect the attendance at games. 
Before the analysis the data was explored from the game level perspective. It was observed that the average attendance rate has gone down with each year. Some games had the extremely low attendance rate and even attendance rate of the games with great sales weren’t ideal. For the games with high sales or special teams, pre-analysis such as basic information collected, tickets sold distribution and past performance of related account ids (acct id) is essential. If great percent of tickets sold are in the places that are far away from the school, SMU athletics can plan to provide free transportation or free food in the game with cooperative companies to make these people more convenient and more likely show up.
For the advanced analysis statistical models called Regression models were built to identify which factors influence the attendance rate. It is observed from the regression results that price is not a significant factor that affects a customer behavior of attendance. What it means is that attendance to the games is little affected by the price of tickets. However, it was observed that time of purchase of tickets affects the attendance at games. Some people who bought tickets really early were less likely to attend, which means they might forget or might have more important issues at that date. The games with low temperature were more likely to have low attendance rate.  Furthermore, for different games, related factors have different impact. It is suggested that the SMU football plays against the same team in the future, ticket department can adjust ticket price, change game time or make some improvement based on the analysis for the past game and customers.
The previous section discussed the results from viewing the customers by their recency of purchasing ticket. After recency analysis, it is found that the geographical scope for newly acquired customers for each year is narrowed down. What this means that after initial spike in interest at the start of the football season, the interest goes down in regions located away from SMU campus. To maintain fan interest, the SMU marketing department can strengthen the promotion of football games in the place around the Dallas. 
It was also observed that majority of the newly acquired customers do not buy again. The reasons for this kind of behavior could be explored further if there are more characteristics related to customer buying behavior data which could be gathered from a survey.  Therefore, it is highly recommended that SMU marketing and ticket departments carry out a survey for customers who went to games to get their opinion on games and viewing experience for the future improvement. For the people who have come to the games consistently, SMU ticket department can consider promotional offers to convert them to seasonal ticket buyers. 

### 4.	Seasonal ticket buyer analysis
The seasonal ticket buyers were looked at separately because these are high value customer and the analysis and suggestions made for this group of customers may not necessarily apply to them. Analyzing these customers separately can help in customizing marketing catering to this specific customer base. The goals are to understand the customers from the perspective of the two chief goals of this study: attendance and purchasing behavior. 
For exploratory data analysis, the geographical spread of the customers is plotted on the map of Texas. It shows that customers are mostly centered around the DFW multiplex. However, customers also seem to come from other major Texan cities such as Austin, San Antonio, Houston. Customers are also spread around, albeit sparsely in the regions north-east of Dallas. This suggests that there is interest in SMU football in these region and campaigns can be designed to increase presence in these possible markets which can lead to increasing the customer base. 
Further analyzing the seasonal ticket purchase data reveals that more than half of the customers are renewed their tickets at least once; this section represents loyal customer base. To retain these customers, it is suggested to provide something additional such as enhanced user experience so that they keep coming back.  It was also observed that 40% of the seasonal ticket buyers are also paying full price of the ticket. The tickets types can be further split at the granularity of the price code. These price codes were observed to be associated with price. Reviewing the price codes can help the client with what is the median price that most of the customers are willing to pay for the seasonal tickets. It was observed that the internet sales were negligibly low. As the sources of data has not been confirmed it is difficult to postulate if the low internet sales are a feature of the selective data entry in which case the interpretation that internet sales of seasonal tickets are low may be biased. On the other hand, if this data has all the records from internet sales then it means that there is big scope of improvement for SMU to increase its web presence, thus reaching out to internet savvy customers. Social media, email marketing campaigns, web campaigns are some of the suggested routes for increasing internet sales. 
Post exploratory data analysis, the client goal of attendance was analyzed for seasonal ticket buyers. Although the number of ticket buyers has seen marginal decrease the attendance itself has increased. This is encouraging from the attendance point of view. Drilling further down at the year level, it is observed that the number if ticket buyers have varied between 15000-22000. 2015 was good year for seasonal ticket sales. The number of tickets sold saw an increase from 2013-15, the slightly dipped in 2016 and picked up again at 2017, perhaps indicating an increase in interest as observed from attendance. Despite the general increase in the number of tickets purchased over the years, the attendance has consistently remained at or less than half the number of tickets sold for all the years for which the data was provided. In section 3 of the analysis it was observed that the general attendance at games decreases as the season progresses. A similar behavior is observed for the seasonal ticket buyers. As these customers make the purchase before the start of the season, it is natural behavior for fan interest to wane as the season progresses. To maintain interest, reminders for games, or pre-game activities can be a good way to attract these customers back to increase game attendance. 
Observing at the granularity of the ticket price code, AR and BR are the two most popular ticket types both in terms of number of tickets purchase and number of people attending. 
As an additional analysis, the price aspect of tickets was also analyzed. The seasonal ticket prices ranges from $50-$1400. Most of the purchases were made for the ticket that were in the lower than average price range of $50-$100. Although the median price per ticket may be low but some of the tickets brought in most amount of net earning from ticket sales. In terms of sales AR, AN, DANR are the most popular type of tickets by price code. BR and AR are the top earning price code. What this tells is that a major portion of the seasonal ticket buyers prefer tickets prefer tickets priced in the range of $75-100. Some these ticket price codes also happen to bring in most amount of money. To attract more customers, the customer experience for these types of customers could be something worth giving a try, this would help in increased attendance at games. 
The final part of the analysis is focused on the finding if customers can be segment based on their attendance and purchasing behavior. The customers that have high attendance and are paying more than the average ticket price are the most loyal fan base. These are the customers SMU athletics must target to hold on to through special promotions such as giveaways. Some high paying customers have low attendance, for these category of customer reminders in the form of email or phone calls depending on the medium through which they purchased the tickets, is suggested. For the customers who pay less than the average ticket price and have low attendance, promotional activities are suggested to increase their participance.

### 5.	Customer profiles based on ticket purchase and census data
One of the main objectives for this project is to identify the specific area and population with certain demographic features that have the potential to be the future customers for the client to implement marketing strategies. The following data were used from American Community Survey: population density, household size, households with children under 18 years old, and income level in Dallas county. To make the data easier to read on the map, data was grouped by zip code. To segment the customers based on the data from census the data was categorized into 3-4 groups by applying some statistical methods. Furthermore, two ratios which are thought to pertinent for the analysis were calculated: children-to-household ratio and customer-to-population ratio. 
Based on the maps, it was found that tickets are sold unevenly across Dallas area: people with income in the range of $53,000 to $68,000 made the most purchase while zip codes with the lowest income bought the least amount of tickets. However, it cannot be concluded based on the current data whether people with average income are the main customers. When population is taken into consideration (c/p ratio), areas with the highest income has the greatest ticket purchase record and it is greater than the other four groups combined. This information shows the uneven tickets sold distribution and proves the necessity to target areas with different market strategy and using different level of marketing force. 
Further analysis reveals that current students and alums can be target customers. It was observed that there are still a lot of alums live in Dallas after graduation and a large portion of current students are based in Dallas as well. By using the maps, it is suggested that the client focus on the zip code where they live and apply with different market strategies. In section 2 of analysis, it was observed that current free ticket strategy has a lot of room of improvement. One of the suggestions for marketing strategies is to give free tickets to alums and turn them into seasonal ticket holders. It is also suggested to do more research on our alums, especially on those with job function that is client-faced. They could bring a lot of volume to our stadium through network effect. This might bring more corporate sponsorships and donors to SMU. 
By aggregating previous analysis on ticket data and census data, several maps were created that can be customized according to client’s requirement. By using filters and layers, these maps give the client full freedom to select and choose areas that they want to target. The target groups and strategies will always change and adjust to new information and new business objective. The maps can meet the requirements and give all the demographic and historical information based on clients’ need and create formatted profiles for each zip code. Furthermore, clients can easily add new data source with the data structure that we built and keep the analysis updated and accurate. 

### 6.	Social media analysis
The purpose of this analysis is to lay out SMU Athletics’ social media relationship. Understanding relationships between SMU Athletics and SMU Twitter followers will help SMU Athletics better tracking social media activities, deploying budget spending and monitoring social media contents. 
Two NodeXL networks have been created for hashtag #ponyup and account @smumustangs. The networks and data have been integrated into Significant accounts have been extracted from the networks. From the research, the team found the inner relationships between “star” accounts and its small community. It could be beneficial for SMU to cooperate with those high engagement level accounts. They not limited to high school football stars but should include personal sports channels, celebrities, etc. The team also evaluated several most used hashtags. The conclusion is the SMU should always use #ponyup because it is most recognized hashtag and it helps to enlarge exposure. The team also developed descriptive analysis for twitter activities for a period between August 2017 to April 2018. The team recommended to plan Twitter activities according to the actual event more closely. Creating more sports related tweets in the beginning of the season and creating more event related tweets in the second half of the season. Also, trying to create tweet that related to real time issue rather than using tweet as an announcement tool. After all, all Twitter activities have to feed back to real offline events.
